From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 547. In this episode,
Scott talks with children's author
and programming instructor, Linda Lucas, about
her book. Hello, Ruby, and
about teaching coding to kids.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Linda Lucas from Finland, and
she's here to talk to
me about her children's book
now, media empire. Hello, Ruby.
How are you? I'm teasing
you a little bit about
your empire, but I understand
that your book, hello, Ruby
is now your full time
job. Yes, I'm a full
time children's book, author illustrator,
and still a pretty mediocre
programmer. Well, there's nothing wrong
with that. So how did
you have this idea? And
was it just a side
thing you were going to
do for fun? It was
absolutely a side thing. I,
I lived in New York for
a while and, and work
at programming startup over there.
And then I moved back
to Helsinki, which is my
native city or country where
I come from Finland. And,
and I had this idea
that I wished there was
a book when I was
growing up, that it would
portray technology as something wonderful
and whimsical and colorful and
fun. And I was learning
Ruby programming as my first
language or, and around the
time I started to really
like learn all of these
technical jargon words, like object
oriented programming or garbage collection.
And every time I would
run into word or a
concept that I didn't quite
understand, I would try to
figure out how would a
six year old little girl
explain this thing? And that's
how the character of Ruby
was originally born. But then
something kind of switched into
my, my brain. And I
started to really see that
the world of technology as
stories, like some people see
math as numbers, math as
us colors, our numbers, his
colors. So I want us
to write a book that
would both explain sort of
what is so magical and
exciting about technology teach about
computational thinking about these concepts
that we should understand even
before we learned to program
and do it all for
the eyes of this little
heroin called Ruby. It seems
so heavy. The topic of,
you know, computational thinking. Is
it an, is it a
good thing that they're young
when you try to teach
them this, that their minds
are, they don't realize it's
going to be hard and
complex? Or is it just
not that complex? I think
it's just not that complex.
And also somehow when I
think about the most profound
things that really taught me
about my, like the role
of friendship or family or,
or adventure, they come from
all childhood stories and their
role models we have as
kids really sort of open
up all of the possibilities
for us. And, and I
figured that if we can
change the way a six
year old sees the world,
we can, we can change
the world and coming from
the sort of startup world
of scalable change and, and
Vic ideas. I, I figured
that that, yeah, like if
we can change kids, we
can change the world. What
was your original goal? How
much were you, how much
were you thinking you would
need to go and kick
this off? So I originally
wasn't even thinking about Kickstarter
as a platform. I, I
started to like make these
little drawings, these little doodles
around Ruby and her friends.
And there was the friend
called tox, the penguins or
the Linux programmers in the
audience might know this character
pretty well. It's a ping
when that is really smart
and efficient, but somewhat hard
to understand. And when I
thought about Apple as a
company, I would think about
snoler part. Who's really beautiful,
but doesn't want to play
with the other kids because
they are too messy and
so forth and so forth.
So it was this like
really silly toning. She collect
geeky little drawings that I
made into my tumbler and
then some friends really, they
encouraged me that because I
was very heavily involved in
the Ruby on rails community
day. I met a lot
of Ruby developer, moms and
dads around the world who
said that, Oh, I wish
I could have a way
of talking about my profession
to my kids who only
see me in front of
the computer and who don't
really like, I don't have
the vocabulary and the words
and the stories to talk
about my own profession. So
I figured that, okay, I'm
going to do this book
on in order to make
the self publishing around sign.
I need to gather $10,000.
And that's what I originally
set as my golf, But
it looks like within just
a single day on Kickstarter,
you raised a hundred thousand
and that must've felt unbelievable.
Like maybe people were, it
was couldn't have been real.
Absolutely. Totally. I, I remember
coming home and realizing that,
Oh, wow. Like I actually
became a children's book author
before that it was like
almost a joke, like a,
like a side project thing
that I hadn't fully committed
to. And, and my first
reaction was to panic because
I had absolutely no idea
how to make this thing
happen. And I had never
like actually made a book
before or, or drawn anything
like bigger than the little
sketches and doodles. And it
was a very, very steep
learning curve all the way,
Because now suddenly you have
to produce physical book and
print it and make it
high quality and this so
many more things that have
nothing to do with programming.
Absolutely. And, and also the
audience changed because it wasn't
anymore. The program are dads
and moms. It was all
kinds of adults and parents
who like said that, Oh,
I don't know how to
program that. I, I recognize
that this is something that
I want my kid or
children to be able to
understand. So, so that approach
really needed to change. And
I think I originally said
that, Oh, I'm going to
make like a 32 page
book. And I think there,
the end result ended up
being like 120 pages if
I remember correctly. So, so
the book also grew in
size and it was also
late, which was most like
anxious thing ever coming from
the industry where you deploy
like five times a day
and the publishing industry where
like they told me already,
I think in, in March
that there is no way
that you can like say
that this is going to
be a story in September.
It was like a year
of waiting for me after
I had actually finished the
book. That must have been
very painful. Yeah. I, for
a year I woke up
every night, like two hours
after I would go to
sleep, I would wake up
and just like scream out
a loud in panic figures.
That was, that was the
way I was feeling at
the time. And I also
felt that I had let
down all of the people
like Kickstarter, backers who had
put so much trust and
faith in me. And it
was a lot of anxiety
around that time. I don't
want to talk too much
about this, but it's worth
pointing out though that you
ended up according to Kickstarter
with almost $400,000. But because
you're making physical things that
doesn't necessarily mean that you
become like super rich overnight,
you still have to buy
the money. That money is
not for you to like,
I don't know, sit in
a big pile of money,
that's for you to make
actual hardcover books workbooks. So
how does that work? You,
you bring all this money
in, but now you have
to turn around and find
a book publisher to physically
make the thing. Yeah, that
was a, that was a,
like a new thing to
learn to me also like
coming from the software industry
where things scale and, and
the cost of another piece
of software, doesn't like, it's
not linear in the same
way. As in the real
world, I needed to figure
out how to distribute 10,000
books to different people all
around the world. And, and
yeah, it was a, it
was a pretty heavy thing.
And as I mentioned, I'm
not a media empire yet
because it really costs to
do all of those things.
But in some ways I
always felt that the, the
financial sort of runway, the
Kickstarter audience gave me to,
to make the best possible
book was also something, no,
like in no other time
of the history, I would
have been able to do
this. So it's, it's also
sort of the artistic creativity
and freedom that, that, that
money gave me. And, and
I always saw Ruby as
way more than only a
book. So, so now two
years after the Kickstarter, it's,
it's still money that I
sort of use every single
day. The bedrock. That's a
really good segue because you
say that there's an artistic
component, there's a programming component.
We now know that there
is a large logistical and
business. You're right. It's all,
it's about so much more
than just programming. When you
try to put programming in
kids' brains, you need to
teach them about systems and,
and what else do we
have to have them understand?
So I think the more
I've worked on, on this
whole Heller will be project.
The more I've realized that
I'm actually preparing kids for
a world where everything is
slowly turning into a computer.
And if a problem, to
some extent is starting to
be a computer science problem.
And, and when I say
to this, to people who
are not programmers, they are
like, Whoa, wow, that's a
bold statement. I'm like, Ooh.
Yeah. But when you think
about it, like we used
to have CDs and now
we have Spotify and we
used to have cash money.
And now we have all
sorts of apps to handle
our, our, our money and,
and so forth. Like one
by one, all of these
tangible, physical things are turning
into computers and software and
programming is one important component
of that, for sure. But
sometimes I feel like we're
so focused on the idea
of teaching kids, JavaScript or
Ruby or Python or whatever,
like the grammar of off
coding, and we forgot the
poetry part. And that's really
what matters. You did a
TEDx talk on the poetry
of programming. I'm curious, does
that have to do with
how you felt about Ruby
as being a very poetic
language or is that just
coincidence? It's a coincidence, but
it was also my first
programming, my first real programming
language. I had tried PHP
before when I was younger.
I, I don't know. I
think one of the things,
I mean, with the idea
that if we're teaching programming
as the first foreign language
for our kids, we should
be teaching poetry. Instead of
grammar lessons is the idea
that like code is a
way to express yourself and
solve problems. And, and in
some ways we take a
lot of that creativity out.
If we just teach kids
how to write an EFL
statement and, and rather we
should be teaching them to
bend and join and break
and sort of combined code
in new ways. And it's
as creative at all as
music or drawing or, or
words. Yeah. I like it
when people explain code in
ways that are not analytical
or not computational, like I'm
a big fan of the
word code smell, and you
know, like code smells bad.
And when I'm teaching my
children, I have an eight
year old and a 10
year old when I'm teaching
them words, we'll try to
tell them to think about
how does that word feel
in your mouth? You know
what I mean, does that
cause there's a poetic miss
to the words I was
trained to teach the eight
year old, some word and
the word mendacity came up.
So I had to go
and look up the word
mendacity and figure out what
it meant. It means untruthfulness.
So someone, the definition is
someone could be publicly castigated
for pastor mendacity. That means
you get yelled at for
lying. And now my eight
year old is running around
using these fancy words that
are really bigger than he
is, but he says that
they feel good in his
mouth. And when I think
about the poetry of, of
programming, you want someone to
be able to write a
program and then that program
should feel a certain way
and make the person feel
a certain way. Hmm, absolutely.
And when you think about
it, it's like, there are
very few other professions that
have such a vivid language
as, as programmers. Like we
have Troy and horses and
we have, we have all
of these very like vivid
and expressive and, and like
creative words that we come
up with and, and use
to describe the very abstract
world we live in. Hm,
absolutely. So you, you, your
project went big and then
now you have to deal
with parents, probably even nontechnical
parents. Did the, did the
direction that you thought this
was going to go change
or did the book end
up with what you did?
You write the book, you
thought you were going to
write? I think I wrote
the book. I was ready
to write at the time.
I remember asking a lot
of people, like when do
I know a book is
ready, except that the deadline
went already, like for you
months ago, four months ago,
someone told me that like
a book is, is who
you are at that given
time in your life. And,
and at that given moment,
I'm still really proud of
the book. I would probably
do a few things differently
nowadays, but I said it
before, like, I feel like
Hillary was always, for me
something way bigger than only
a book. I, I started
with the first book because
a book for me is
a campfire. It's our era,
where there is more computers
and tablets and many different
forms of distributing information like
podcasts. I still felt that
there's something very relevant with
a book, especially when you're
talking about kids who already
have a lot of screen
time in their lives, sort
of trying to explain these
concepts with, with the old
fashioned world of books, but
already two years ago, I
had a pretty good idea
of what I'm going to
do next. And, and the
second book actually, which came
out this fall in, in
Finland. And I think next
year in, in U S
talks about computers and how
computers work. And then the
third book I think that
I'm working on right now
is, is about how internet
works. And I think I'm
going to do one on
how artificial intelligence works. It's
going to have Siri and,
and what's, and, and all
of those guys as characters
there. So I think the
book series has evolved further
as I'm, I'm seeing more
and more needs and things
that parents want to be
able to explain to their
kids At, at your website
at hello, ruby.com. You've also
got like online activities, but
is it still important to
have that physical hardcover children's
book that's on a shelf
somewhere? No, I Think so.
I'm of course like a
product of all of the
open source movement and, and
things that are like I've
grown up with on online
and, and all of the
activities on Heller, ruby.com are,
are things that you can
do without actually purchasing the
books. So I'm really happy
if someone just goes in
there and, and does them,
one of my favorites is
this activity where you can
build a computer out of
paper, and it's this very
sort of Japanese style, fun
looking, little computer. And you
put in your little CPU
and GPU and the REM
and the Roman, the hard
drive and, and so forth.
And you learn how, how
your little computer works. So,
so those kinds of arts
and crafts, kids, and parents,
or teachers can do together
or something that is very
important for me. So there's,
there's a, there's a, a
kinesthetic or a physical way
for this to, to be
in someone's life. You're not
necessarily in a flash game
online. You can go and
make your computer, your little
laptop out of paper, and
kids could do this in
a, in a kindergarten. Absolutely.
And, and one of my
big dreams is one day
to make like an art
exhibition where you could crawl
inside of a computer. And
instead of learn through tangible
play, how computers work from
sort of the, the electricity,
how it turns into bits
and the bits turn into
logic, Gates, and logic Gates
into components and hardware and
software and how it all
sort of fits together. And
I think that's what we're
talking about when we're talking
about teaching computer science for
everyone, because kids are very
different as learners. And, and
if we're serious about making
computer science, approachable and, and
accessible for different kinds of
kids, we need to teach
kids who best learned from
moving their bodies or who
best learned by singing out
loud things and, and so
forth and so forth so
that the methods need to
also arrive not only like
books or, or interactive online
exercises. Did you have experience
working with schools before you
started writing this book A
little bit? I used to
work at a company called
code Academy and, and we
would run a few pilots
with schools, but it would
be for kids were older.
And while I was working
on the first book, I,
I had this big infrastructures
in room for the longest
of times, like, who am
I to make this folk
end? I'm still learning to
program myself. And I don't
have a degree in early
childhood education, but something that
really calmed my thinking was
to, to bring kids to
the office every week. So,
so we would bring kids
to the office and do
sort of play testing with
them and ask them for
feedback and see how they
reacted with the books, with
the exercises. And, and, and
it's interesting to see how
similarly kids think throughout the
world. So the book has
been translated into 19 different
languages, and I think that
it's been most popular in,
in us and in, in
Japan, out of all places.
And I've been lucky enough
to visit Japan quite a
few times in the last
years and really see like
Japanese kids work on these
exercises that I originally kind
of designed for Finnish or,
or like Western kids. And
it's really fun to see
how, how, how similarly kids
in the end think. Yeah,
that's interesting. That's what I
was going to ask. Cause
now you are translating this
into multiple languages and you'll
have a half dozen or
maybe a dozen languages at
some point, our, our kids,
just kids. Did we, did
you confirm that To some
extent kids are just kids.
I think the vocabulary of
computer science, especially for, for
English speaking countries, it's hard
to understand that the expressiveness
and the approachability of, of
the vocabulary in English is
like para, like it's amazing
in Japanese, my translator, who
was a part of the,
the Ruby community, she needed
to come up with new
ways of, of like on
your terms that didn't really
exist in the Japanese language
for the book and in
finish, like the word sequence
or the, the word decomposition.
Those are monster words that
sound like very scary and
very frightening. So, so I'm,
I'm almost thinking that maybe
I shouldn't be translating the
vocabulary into other languages because
in the end, like English
is kind of a lingua
franca programming. Yeah. It is
interesting how English has that
has that role. I actually
wrote a blog post a
while back about how unfortunately
English is really almost required
for, to be a program
or at least to absorb
programming information online. I always
try to ask from Yuki
Hera Matsumoto, who is like
them, the father of Ruby.
Does he think that like
him being like Japanese and,
and talking Japanese influences a
lot of his language design
or influenced the design of
Ruby and, and maybe that's
why I found it so
approachable because it's, it's a
very like that, that he's
approached would be like a
non English approach. But he
said that he doesn't think
about that a lot of,
so, so probably not, I
don't know, but it's also
curious too, to see how
much culture affects programming languages
and coming from a small
Scandinavian country that is also
the home of Linux, get
my SQL S H IRC,
like all of these technologies
and Finland is 5 million people.
I can sort of help,
but wonder whether it's, it's
sort of our, it looks
very like social democratic mentality
of the society and the
idea that we do things
to help one another and
push like equity over excellence
and all of those ideas
that, that helped shape this
weird, like open source world.
It's interesting that you're saying
that it being Japanese didn't
affect his design that much.
Because when I think of
Ruby, I think of when,
when fluent API APIs and
APIs that looked like, look,
look like sentences started to
develop, perhaps that was DHHS.
Yeah. But yeah, I'm just
thinking that, like who, who
started that? Like let's string
it together. So it's a
big, long sentence, but maybe,
maybe, yeah. Oh, that's it.
That is interesting. So what
is next for, for Ruby?
You have, you're doing this
full time now, but it's
more than just, there's one
book there's books coming, you
said. Hmm. So there's, it's
definitely a trial at least.
And we're thinking a little
bit about classroom content and
how to create exercises for
teachers to just sort of
taking to the classroom and
teach these things unplugged. There's
this wonderful resource by teachers
all over the world. I
believe it's run by New Zealand
and Australia and teachers originally
called CS unplugged.org, which has
a lot of different games
and activities where you can
teach binary search for kids
for like a tag you're
it activity, or are all
of these like fun unplugged
physical activities that teach you
the basics of computer science.
But sometimes they are a
little bit hard for like
a non CS person to
get into or a noncompeting
person. And I'm trying to
design really for the total
beginner, like the kindergarten teacher
who actually fears computers a
little bit, or the element
elementary school teacher who is,
who thinks that coding is
scary. So, so trying to
think about how those teachers
could teach, prepare kids for
a world full of computers.
How far do you think
you can take this? Is
this, is this your life
for the next 20 years?
I definitely wish so I
have no rush out of
doing this. And I think
the more I do this,
the more I discover new
opportunities and things to work
on, I think eventually I
want to start my own
school. That would be like
a big dream for mine.
And really, like, I don't
even think I dare to
dream anymore because so many
of the things that I've
wished for have come true
in some form or another.
Yeah. Have you learned anything
from any of the children
who've read the book that
will influence the future for
you Every single day? I
feel like the kids are
the best teachers. I, I
have, they guide my product
development process and they give
me ideas of where to
take Ruby. Next. One of
my favorite stories is this
little girl who I asked
the kids at the English
school here in Helsinki to
define what technology is and
who uses technology. And what
is it used for? And
this little six year, nine
year old kid came to
me and she said, or
she wrote down on a
piece of paper, that technology
is electricity, that loves. So
technology is electricity that loves
and is used for play.
And I use it with
mom and we have a
conversation with WhatsApp application. And
then finally she said, people
use these technology. And I
think that was like one
of the most charming and
the most poetic ways of
defining technology that I've ever
heard. And just the fact
that she, she could understand
that people use this technology
is like the most profound
statement about technology made me
really happy about the future
generations. Well, it definitely says
that if the children learn
how to program, then you
know, human centered design is
really at the forefront because
I feel like sometimes the,
when the, when the really,
really technical techies get ahold
of technology, we, we get
software. That's not fun and
not human focused, but if
we can get more six
year olds doing it, there'll
be thinking about people and
they won't be, they won't
be jaded like we are
as old people. That's the
funny thing. I think everyone
starts their career in technology
with this sort of childlike
enthusiasm and, and the magic
that, that the amount of
magic you feel when you
get the computer to Aveo
will, it's just something that
I feel like everyone who
is being excited about technology
and computers remembers, but then
somehow we all lose it
at some point. And, and
we really need the kids
to remind us about how,
how exciting a field this
is and how much there
is still to do and
discover In schools right now,
in the, at least in
the U S we have
this phrase, reading, writing, and
arithmetic, like it's the three
RS, I don't know how
programming is going to fit
into that, but do you
think that programming needs to
be something that we start
teaching in kindergarten? And we
put it up there with
reading and writing and thinking
about computers To some extent.
Yeah, I think so. So
in Finland, what we did
just this fall is we
put programming as a mandatory
like school subject, but instead
of making it into a
school subject, we actually implemented
across, across the curriculum, meaning
that kids learn programming while
they are learning about English
or, or arts or social
sciences or biology. And, and
I think that's really the
way we should be teaching
programming more as a problem
solving tool less as a,
as a discipline alone, because
after all programming is just
one tool for a computer
scientist or like any citizen
to solve problems, much like,
like, I dunno, like physicists
use a prism or, or
the biologist use a pipette,
like a programmer uses programming
as one tool of problem
solving. So I don't see
anything very interesting in that
the notion of just putting
programming into the core car,
where you can learn more
like the cross disciplinary approach
and, and sort of raising
kids who have like this
whole variety of different tools
that therapy be use. Yeah.
I, I had a woman
on the show a while
back named Kisho, who said
that we shouldn't teach kids
how to code. We should
teach them how systems work.
And I thought that was
really powerful. Like w when
something doesn't work, how does
your brain solve that problem?
Like, you know, even for
something like, you know, I
plugged a TV into a
DVD player and then something
didn't work and you have
to break down that system
into pieces and then figure
out where this thing fell
down. And some people find
that very intuitive and they
say, okay, is it the
cable? It's not the cable
is the power on, well,
is there power to the
house? Is there a switch
that controls the power? You
know, all of those things
that I think that techies
think are intuitive, regular people
don't know how do we
make sure that everyone can
be a techie? Yeah. And
it's, it's, it's kind of
like a broader set of
skills, like decomposing a problem,
or being able to spot
patterns or like debug problems,
like, as you said, and,
and it really drives me
crazy when I have this
little girls who come to
me and say, Oh, Linda,
I'm not good at programming.
I, I forgot to send
me a call on from
this code. I'm like, yeah.
But like, even the best
programmers in the world, they
make mistakes every single day.
I promise you it's part
of the persistency and side
of the Tenicity to, to
overgrow those come those problems.
So, yeah, absolutely. Yeah. There's
a, there's always every program
or every old programmer has
that joke about the a
million dollar. Semi-colon the one
that you have to just,
you know, you all stared
at it, then you've got
more and more and more
senior programmers to look for
the million dollar summer call.
And so, yeah. I don't
think that anyone should feel
bad about that at all.
That's so funny that people
would, you know, people get
it in their minds that
they're not good at something.
And it just takes a
moment and it's a virus
and we have to keep
that virus from getting root
inside them. Yeah. My, you
know, in the old days,
in the eighties, there was
a, a Barbie doll that
you would pull the string
and she would say math
is hard. Oh yeah. That's
so bad. And I think
the craziest thing is, is
little girls. They don't know
that they are not supposed
to like programming. It's only
around, I think the age
of 10 to tell that
they really start to define
themselves. And before that little
girls, they are really inquisitive
and they ask questions and
they can concentrate well, and
they have all of the
skills to become a programmer.
Exactly. Exactly. And even my,
in my eight year old
boy is already starting to
get the sense that maybe
math is hard and math
isn't for him. And he,
they just, they self select.
And I don't like that.
I don't like, Oh, I
can't do this. It's too
hard because he thinks he
should know it out of
the box. Like, like he
should come knowing this. I'm
like, well, no, you're going
to get it wrong. So
when did we, when did
we make it? So mistakes
turned people away. And then
they only went to their
strengths as opposed to working
on their weaknesses. How do
you, how did you write
the book such that was
it just for girls or
boys can read this book
and it's gender nonspecific. It's
ginger nonspecific. I wrote the
book with the idea that
I wish there was a
book like this when I
was growing up. So, but
it doesn't exclude boys. And
rather, like one of the
most exciting things for me
has been to say in
Japan, like little voice, come
to me and say that
their favorite character is Ruby.
And that makes me really
happy and proud because I
think that's the future of
the world where little six
year old boys can say
that their hero hero is,
is like a little girl
who codes or programs or
solves problems. And that's what
star Wars is doing with
Ray and, and other characters.
But I, I think it's
almost more important that little
boys can see girls as
role models, then that girls
have Gayle role models, but
both are important. And then
hopefully in a few years
when these little boys and
girls are grown up and
become programmers, they'll put together
great, great looking groups of
people from all walks of
life and they'll make software
for everybody. Well, thank you
so much, Linda Lucas for chatting
with me today about hello,
Ruby and people can find
that at hello, ruby.com. It's
been so nice to talk
to you. Thank you for
having me. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.